Are you there?
Is your name there?
Is your name “written in the book of life”?
What “book of life”?
Well, in Malachi chapter 3,
we notice that it refers
to “a book of remembrance.”
And this book has a record of all those
‘who fear Jehovah and treasure his name.’
Yes, this “book of remembrance”
is a record of all those
who are in line to receive everlasting life.
So all of us want to have our names
written in that book, don’t we?
But if we do have our name in that book,
does that mean that we
automatically will receive everlasting life?
No.
We remember what Jehovah said to Moses,
as recorded in Exodus chapter 32.
There he said: ‘Anyone who sins against me,
I will wipe out from my book.’
So names can be erased
from this book of life.
It’s as if our names are written
in this book of life
in pencil.
So all of us surely want to make sure
that our names remain in this book of life
right through to the time
that they are written permanently in the book
in pen, as it were.
But whose names are in this book of life?
We’re going to consider together
five different groups of persons,
some of whom have their names
in the book of life and others who don’t.
So let’s watch this presentation
that discusses these five groups.
The first group:
Those who have been selected
to rule with Jesus in heaven.
Are their names written in this book of life?
According to Philippians 4:3,
the answer is yes.
But even though they’ve been anointed
with holy spirit,
they still need to remain faithful
in order to have their names
written permanently in this book.
The second group:
the great crowd of Armageddon survivors.
Are the names of these faithful ones
now written in the book of life?
Yes.
What about after they survive Armageddon?
Will their names still be
in the book of life?
Yes.
How do we know?
At Matthew 25:46, Jesus says
that these sheeplike ones depart
“into everlasting life.”
But does that mean they are granted
everlasting life
at the beginning of the Thousand Year Reign?
No.
Revelation 7:17 tells us
that Jesus “will guide them
to springs of waters of life.”
So they don’t immediately receive
everlasting life.
However, their names are written
in the book of life
in pencil, as it were.
The third group:
the goats who will be destroyed
at Armageddon.
Their names are not in the book of life.
2 Thessalonians 1:9 tells us:
“These very ones will undergo
the judicial punishment
of everlasting destruction.”
The same could be said of those
who have deliberately sinned
against the holy spirit.
They too receive everlasting destruction,
not everlasting life.
So the first three groups are
the anointed,
the great crowd,
and the goats.
Of these three,
only two are found in the book of life.
Now let’s talk about two more groups:
Those who will be resurrected
in the new world.
First, though, let’s read together
Acts 24:15.
There the apostle Paul says:
“I have hope toward God,
“which hope these men also look forward to,
“that there is going to be a resurrection
“of both the righteous
and the unrighteous.”
So the fourth group are
the righteous who have died.
These include some of our loved ones.
Are their names written in the book of life?
Yes.
Revelation 17:8 tells us
that this book has been in existence
since “the founding of the world.”
Jesus referred to Abel as living
“from the founding of the world,”
so we can assume that his name
was the first name written in that book.
Since that time,
millions of other righteous ones
have had their names added to this book.
Now, here’s an important question:
When these righteous ones died,
were their names
taken out of the book of life?
No.
They’re still living in Jehovah’s memory.
Remember, Jesus said that Jehovah
“is a God, not of the dead,
but of the living,
for they are all living to him.”
The righteous will be restored to life
here on earth
with their names still written
in the book of life.
They did good things before they died.
So that is why they will be part
of the resurrection of the righteous ones.
No doubt some of them
will receive privileges,
such as serving
“as princes in all the earth.”
Finally, let’s talk about the resurrection
of “the unrighteous.”
For the most part, the unrighteous
didn’t have an opportunity
to develop a relationship with Jehovah.
They did not live righteous lives.
So that’s why they are called unrighteous.
When these unrighteous ones are resurrected,
are their names written in the book of life?
No.
But their being resurrected
gives them an opportunity
to have their names eventually written
in the book of life.
These unrighteous ones
will need a lot of help.
In their former life, some of them practiced
horrible, vile things.
So they’ll need to learn
to live by Jehovah’s standards.
To accomplish this,
God’s Kingdom will sponsor
the greatest educational program
in all human history.
Who will teach these unrighteous persons?
Those who have their names written
in pencil in the book of life
—the great crowd
and the resurrected righteous ones.
How can these unrighteous ones
have their names written in the book of life?
They will need to develop
a relationship with Jehovah
and dedicate their lives to him.
But will all the unrighteous
accept that opportunity?
No.
Remember, all these unrighteous ones
will be under the careful watch of Jesus
and his fellow judges.
Isaiah 65:20 tells us
that those who refuse to accept this help
will be removed.
No one will be allowed to cause
any ruin in the new world.
So any who display a wicked attitude
during the thousand years
will be removed.
With all these facts in mind then,
let’s now read together
John 5:28, 29.
Jesus said: “Do not be amazed at this,
“for the hour is coming
in which all those in the memorial tombs
“will hear his voice and come out,
“those who did good things
“to a resurrection of life,
“and those who practiced vile things
to a resurrection of judgment.”
Now, for a few moments,
let’s think about those verses
at John 5:28, 29.
Up to now, we have understood
Jesus’ words to mean
that the resurrected ones
will do “good things”
and that some will do “vile things”
after their resurrection.
But notice there in verse 29,
Jesus didn’t say
that they will  do these good things
or they will  practice vile things.
He used the past tense, didn’t he?
Because he said that they “did good things”
and that they “practiced vile things.”
So this would indicate to us
that these deeds, or actions,
were committed by these ones
prior to their death
and before they would be resurrected.
So that makes sense
—doesn’t it?—
because no one is going to be allowed
to practice vile things in the new world.
So, what did Jesus mean when he mentioned
these two factors?
Well, for a start, we could say
that the righteous ones still
—when they’re resurrected—
have their names written in the book of life.
It’s true that Romans 6:7 says
that when someone dies,
his sins are canceled
but (take note of this)
not their record of faithfulness.
That’s not canceled.
So the righteous ones are resurrected
into the new world,
and their names are still
in the book of life.
Of course, they need to remain faithful
during the thousand years
to keep their names in that book of life.
But what about the unrighteous ones?
Well, these are the ones who did vile things
before they died.
So when they are resurrected,
they don’t have their names
in the book of life.
It’s not a resurrection to life;
it’s a resurrection to judgment.
Now, why do we say that?
Because there we could say
that the word “judgment”
is not referring to a condemnation.
It’s not referring to something
that is totally negative.
It’s true that at times the word “judgment”
can have that meaning.
But in the context of these verses,
it seems that Jesus
is using the word “judgment”
in a more neutral sense.
So it means more of an evaluation
or a probation period.
So the unrighteous ones
will have an opportunity to accept
this wonderful educational work
that’s going to be done in the new world.
And during that time, they will be evaluated.
And if they dedicate their lives to Jehovah,
then their names will be written
into the book of life.
Now at this point, you’re probably thinking,
‘Hmm, is this an adjustment
to our understanding?’
Yes, it is.
So now you’re thinking,
‘Now, can you just run that past me again?’
Well, let’s look at this little summary
that will help us.
When Jesus spoke at John 5:29
of those who would receive
a resurrection of life,
he was referring to those
who did good things
before they died
—those whose names are written
in the book of life.
The resurrection of judgment
at John 5:29
involves the resurrection of those
who practice vile things
before they die
and whose names are not yet written
in the book of life.
But whether previously righteous
or unrighteous,
all these resurrected ones will need to obey
the laws in the new scrolls
referred to at Revelation 20:12.
There it says: “I saw the dead,
“the great and the small,
standing before the throne,
“and scrolls were opened.
“But another scroll was opened;
“it is the scroll of life.
“The dead were judged out of those things
written in the scrolls
according to their deeds.”
Yes, they will be judged individually
“according to their deeds.”
But what deeds?
Will it be their deeds committed
before they die?
No.
Otherwise, the resurrection
of the unrighteous
would have been a pointless waste.
Here, then, their deeds
cannot be deeds from their former life.
Rather, this verse must refer to their deeds
in response to their training
in the new world.
Even such faithful men
as Noah, Samuel, David, and Daniel
will have to learn
about the sacrifice of Christ
and exercise faith in it.
All of this also helps us to understand
an amazing prophecy in the book of Daniel.
Let’s turn there.
It’s Daniel 12:1-3.
There it says: “During that time
“Michael [who is Jesus Christ]
“will stand up [that is, at Armageddon],
“the great prince who is standing
“[since 1914]
“in behalf of your people.
“And there will occur a time of distress
“[that is, the great tribulation]
“such as has not occurred
“since there came to be a nation
until that time.
“And during that time
your people will escape,
“everyone who is found
written down in the book
[and this refers to the great crowd].”
But notice what follows:
“And many of those asleep
in the dust of the earth will wake up,
“some to everlasting life
and others to reproach
and to everlasting contempt.”
So looking at Daniel 12:2,
it seems appropriate, too, that we adjust
our understanding of this verse.
Notice that there it speaks
about people waking up
in the form of a resurrection,
and this occurs
after what’s mentioned in verse 1
—after the great crowd survives
the great tribulation.
So this obviously is talking
about a literal resurrection
of the righteous and unrighteous.
But what does it mean
when it mentions there, in verse 2,
that some will be raised to everlasting life
and others to everlasting contempt?
What does that really mean?
Well, when we notice that,
we notice that this is a little different
from what Jesus said in John chapter 5
when he spoke about life and judgment.
But now, here he is talking
about everlasting  life
and everlasting  contempt.
So that term “everlasting”
helps us to realize
that this is talking about the final outcome,
after these ones have had an opportunity
to accept the education.
So those who are resurrected
who make good use
of this education,
well, they will continue on
and ultimately receive
everlasting life.
But then on the other hand,
any who refuse to accept
the benefits of that education
will be judged
as worthy of eternal destruction.
Now let’s finally read verse 3:
“And those having insight
“will shine as brightly
as the expanse of heaven,
“and those bringing the many to righteousness
like the stars, forever and ever.”
This is speaking
about the massive educational work
that will be done in the new world.
The glorified anointed ones
will shine brightly
as they work closely with Jesus
to direct the education work
that will bring the many to righteousness.
What a joy it will be for them to take part
in this amazing work
in their role as priests.
They will assist
with “the healing of the nations.”
And what a privilege it will be
to see obedient humans
become free from the burden of sin and death
and gain perfection!
Of course, we have to realize
that at that time on earth,
there won’t be
just the resurrected ones, will there?
There will be the survivors of Armageddon
and any children that are born
in the new world.
These ones will ultimately attain
to perfection.
So is that when they get their names written,
as it were, in ink in the book?
Not quite yet.
Why not?
Well, because perfection
doesn’t automatically mean
that someone would get everlasting life.
Remember the case of Adam and Eve:
They were perfect.
But before they could attain
to everlasting life,
they had to prove their obedience to Jehovah.
Yes.
So we realize, then,
that in the case of Adam and Eve,
they failed.
So questions are raised
with regard to all these perfect ones
on the earth at that time
(the resurrected ones,
the survivors of the great tribulation,
as well as any children
that will have been born):
Will they stand faithful?
Will they continue to support
Jehovah’s sovereignty?
Or will some of them be like Adam and Eve
—be perfect but then unfaithful?
Well, the book of Revelation
helps us to understand
that to answer that question
Satan is released from the symbolic prison,
and he has an opportunity
to test the integrity of Jehovah’s servants.
So each person on earth
will have a personal opportunity
to show where they stand
on the issue of universal sovereignty.
And their individual response
will show whether or not their names
should be written permanently
in the book of life.
Some, an unspecified number,
will turn their backs on Jehovah
and will not support his sovereignty.
What will happen to those ones?
Well, Revelation 20:15 tells us, doesn’t it?
Anyone who isn’t “found written
in the book of life”
will receive everlasting destruction.
But this is the good news:
The majority of perfect mankind
will find themselves passing the final test.
Yes, and their names
will be written permanently
in the book of life.
Isn’t it exciting to think
about what’s going to happen in the future?
Yes, now is the time
that Jehovah is preparing his people
for this massive educational work
that is going to take place in the new world.
So now is the time for each one of us
to think about that question:
Are you there?
Is your name in the book of life?
Yes, may your name be found written
in Jehovah’s book of life,
and may it remain there forever!